Normalization is the word coined by E.F.Codd (who conceived of the relational model) and his colleagues to refer to the organization 
of the logical structure of a database so as to facilitate both ad-hoc query as well as data update. 
In a 1993 interview with DBMS magazine, Codd stated that he got the inspiration for this phrase in 1972 when he read about 
President Nixon "normalizing relations" with China. (Codd used the word "Relation" as a synonym for "Table".) 
It implies "logical" (proper) design of a database with minimal redundancy of data.

When designing a relational database, there is a need to "normalize" the database.  
There are different degrees of normalization, but in general, relational databases should be normalized to the "third normal form".  
Simply put, this means that the attributes (i.e. fields) in each table should "depend on the key, the whole key and nothing but the key".
By moving repeating groups of attributes to a separate database table, the database design becomes more flexible.

1.
Hence Codd's first rule of Normalization: A table shall contain no repeating groups. 
The first step for proper table design is to remove  repeating groups, and place them in a separate table.
A table without repeating groups is said to be in first normal form.

2.
The  second rule of normalization:
If a table has a compound primary key, and one or more fields in a table depend on only part of the primary key for that table, 
move them to a separate table along with that part of the key. To illustrate here:

3.
The  third rule of normalization:
If one or more fields in a table do not depend at all on the primary key for that table (or any part of it), 
move them to a separate table along with copies of the fields on which they do depend.

4.
The fourth rule of normalization can be stated formally: 
If a table appears to combine information that on closer inspection, is composed of independent logical units, 
(both dependent on the primary key for the table) it should be split (decomposed) into separate tables reflecting this independence, 
replicating the primary key for the parent table in each of the daughter tables.

5.
The fifth rule of normalization is: 
Create extra tables as needed to prevent loss of ancillary information when data is updated, added or deleted, 
if an analysis of the problem indicates that such loss is likely to occur. The database literature refers to the design solution 
as "preventing update anomalies".

